Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Loops and
today I'm by Doctor Michael Cook. He is class
of 1943 University Professor of Near Eastern Studies at
Princeton University. He is the author of several books,
and today we're going to talk about his latest
one, a history of the Muslim world, from its
origins to the dawn of modernity. So, Doctor Cook,
welcome to the show. It's a big pleasure to
everyone.
It's a great pleasure for me to be here.
Great. So, let me start by asking you before
we get into the actual history of the Muslim
world. What is the Muslim world? I mean, what
is it characterized by what are we exactly talking
about when we reference the Muslim world?
Right, and like, you know, like so many of
these uh phrases, it's one that different people could
use in different ways. But I mean, what I
want to mean by it is any part of
the world where Muslims are, one, the majority of
the population, or two, the rulers, or both. And
what is characterized by, I mean, by definition, it's
simply this allegiance to Islam of majority of rulers
or of both. And we can then start asking
what, so to speak empirically correlates with that. And
I think we're gonna get onto that uh quite
soon. Right.
So uh just to clarify certain terms here, sometimes
people use the word Islamic, other times Muslim. Is
Islamic the same as Muslim?
Right. And here again, I mean, people can use
the words the way they want, but um, personally,
I'm, I like to make a distinction uh from
my point of view. Anything that Muslims do is
Muslim. And whereas, uh, for something to be Islamic,
it has to be in some intrinsic way Islamic.
So for example, um, I should take a extreme
case, supposing we have somebody who's born into a
Muslim family, and then um is brought up as
a Muslim, but becomes an atheist. Could we call
him a Muslim atheist? Well, perhaps it's a little
contradictory, but perhaps, but I certainly wouldn't want to
call him an Islamic atheist. That to my mind
is nonsense.
Mhm. Right. So let's get into the history here
then. When exactly does the history of the Muslim
world start?
Right. So if we go by my definition of
what the Muslim world is in 622. Or before
6:22, when the prophet Muhammad was active in Mecca,
there was no Muslim world, um, because Muslims were
a minority in Mecca and they didn't rule Mecca.
But uh after 6 to 2, we have the
pro excuse me. We have Muhammed in Medina. And
there in Medina, he gradually comes to be the
ruler of the entire oasis. It's a big oasis.
It takes time, it takes years, and, and gradually
the entire population becomes Muslim. So that by the
time that Muhammad dies in 632, we have, so
to speak, a very miniature Muslim world. Um, WITH
some extension outside Medina. Uh, NOT to the rest
of Arabia, but nowhere outside Arabia. So I would
say between 622 and 632, the death of the
prophet, that's when the Muslim world comes into existence.
So we'll come back to Mohammed and the rise
of the Islamic world later on in our conversation,
but just to give a little bit more of
historical context and background because there's a context and
some events that can be for the rise of
the Muslim world here as you detail in your
book. Um, I mean, how did the Middle East
look like in late antiquity, from the, around the
4th century to early 7th century?
OK. So let's start with um an environmental point.
That applies throughout history, that uh in the Middle
East, we have good lands where you can do
extensive agriculture, and we have bad lands where you
can't. And as a very crude first approximation, the
good lands are in the north, what's now Turkey,
Iran, the fertile crescent, and the badlands are in
the south, and Arabia. And so the answer to
your question is essentially, what has been erected on
that basis? At the in the period of late
antiquity. And the the simple answer is two empires.
Both in the north, the Byzantine Empire and the
Persian Empire. And in the south, we have a
land with no empires. Almost no states um dominated
by tribes, that's the Arabs in Arabia. So that's
very crudely the setup in late antiquity.
Mhm. And so at a certain point, I think
you talk about in your book how the Byzantine
Empire and the Persian Empire went to war in
the early 7th century. Uh, COULD you tell us
about that and why is that particular event important
here?
OK, right. Now, you have coexistence of those two
empires for centuries. And they quite frequently go to
war. But most of the time, the wars they
fight are not seriously destabilizing. You know, the result
in adjustments to the frontier. What happens in the
early 7th century is different. It's a very long
war, and it's very seriously destabilizing. And we almost
get to get to a situation where the Byzantine
Empire looks like it's finished, and we're going to
have a single Persian Empire ruling the whole Middle
East. And then there's a very dramatic reversal of
fortunes. And what comes out of that war is
two seriously weakened empires. And that constitutes a remarkable
opportunity for the Arabs to step in.
OK, so you also mentioned the nomadic people. So
tell us a little bit more about the nomadic
people of the steps. I mean, what role did
they play and how did they relate to both
the Byzantine and the Persian Empire?
Yes, right. And in the Middle East, we have
this situation where the empires are kind of sandwiched
between two groups of nomads, the Arabs in the
south, and the stepped nomads that you mention in
the north. And I think one important point there
is that the steps are very different from the
Arabian Desert. The steps are not a desert. Uh,
THEY are grasslands. And those grasslands are very extensive,
much more extensive than Arabia. So that what comes
out of that is, well, one that um you
have many different step peoples. Whereas basically we have
one people, the Arabs in Arabia. And 2, that
because their economy is based on grass, which feeds
their flocks, they are more affluent, they're richer nomads,
richer pastoralists than the ones of Arabia, and so
they more easily create states in the steppes and
Because these step nomads ride horses more or less
from infancy. They are the world's best cavalry. They're
so to speak, natural cavalry, and that makes them
a serious military threat to the empires in the
age of the cavalry, which we're in the middle
of. And the result is that the empires have
good reason to concentrate much more seriously on the
military threat from the nomads in the north than
on the Arabs in the south. The Arabs can
be a nuisance, but the nomads in the north
are a serious threat. So for example, during that
last war, there are 2 occasions when nomadic states
intervene in the imperial conflict. The Arabs are not
intervening.
So, uh, and I mean, when it comes to
the people of the nomadic people of the steps,
did they did they play any role in the
war between the two empires or in their fall
in any way?
Yes, right. I mean, there's a point at which
the Persians have invaded Anatolia, what's what's now Asiatic
Turkey. And they are on the shores of the
Bosphorus looking across at Constantinople. And meanwhile, the Avas,
one of these nomadic peoples of the steppes, have
come right down and are threatening Constantinople on the
other side. And that's maybe the moment when it
looks most as if the Byzantine Empire is going
to disappear. And then you have this dramatic reversal,
uh, when the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius with extraordinary nerve,
he takes his army, he leaves Constantinople. And he
goes east and into the Persian Empire. And on
the way into the Persian Empire, he's joined by
another step people. They usually refer to them as
the Turks, very likely these are the Khazars from
north of the Caucasus. And they go, they march
through, they ride through the Persian Empire together. And
until at some point the Hazars decide to go
home. But by that time, The Byzantine emperor is
already threatening the Persian capital. The Persians, they have
their armies in the west. They have no army
to put between them and Heraclius. It's a catastrophic
situation. There's a coup d'etat. And That's what really
what ends the war. So you have two dramatic
interventions, one from the others in the west and
the other from the Khazars or Turks in the
east.
So let's talk now a little bit about the
Arabs and specifically in the book you focus on
the Arabian interior where again, Islam was born in
the early 7th century. So what characterized society there?
Right. I think I we start from the resource
poverty of most of Arabia, certainly north of the
Yemen. Uh, WHICH means that a lot of society
is nomadic. That's one basic feature. Uh, THEY'RE not
all nomads, there are oasis. Though there's not too
many of them in the hijas, there is one
big one, and that's the future Medina. And where
the prophet Muhammad is going to establish his state.
Um, BUT this is not territory that is friendly
to state formation. Which is why society is tribal.
Um, IN other words, there are no strong ruling
authorities. There are these tribes which have messy relationships
with each other, and there are messy relationships within
the tribes. You know, one clan within a tribe
may well go to war with another clan, and
so forth, and procedures for dispute resolution. Uh, ARE
not very effective. If you and I have a
dispute, we can only go before a judge if
we both agree to make that guy the judge,
and that doesn't always happen. So you have a
lot of violence coming into dispute resolution. So this
is a society. Yeah, let me sort of end
by saying, That Virtually every adult male possesses arms
and knows how to use them. Um, THIS is
not a society in which we have An army
on the one hand with the weapons and on
the other hand, the civilian population. It's not like
that. Every man is potentially a warrior. Mhm.
And was the lifestyle of this society shaped by
the surrounding environment in any way? And if so,
how?
Yeah, I think in, in at least two ways.
One, we've already mentioned, and that is that um
poverty of resources sort of places severe limits on
the kind of development you can have in Arabia.
The other is that Arabia is mostly open desert.
And it's not like, you know, somewhere very mountainous,
like the Caucasus, where people live in valleys, separated
from each other by enormous mountains. And Arabia is
very much open and to nomads who know how
to travel in Arabia and can easily move around.
And that I think makes for a certain cultural
homogenization of Arabia. Um, AND if we leave out
the far south, it seems that uh in late
antiquity. There is one people, the Arabs, they speak
one language, Arabic. Uh, THEY have, uh, you know,
if you look at the personal names of Arabs
that we have records of from that period. And
you have names that appear all over the peninsula.
Uh, IN the same way, there seems to be
a poetic culture. Which, you know, sort of pervades
the whole peninsula. It's kind of understood in every
part of the peninsula. So I think in that
openness of the Arabian Desert is also an important
environmental factor. Mhm.
But we've been talking mostly about the nomadic peoples
here. What about states? Were there also states in
the Arabian interior or not?
Right. Well, first of all, I mean, the imperial
presence is marginal, literally marginal, um, you know, there's
a bit of it on the east coast with
the Persians, and you have client states, clients to
the empires in the far north, but um no
serious attempt even at imperial rule in the deep
interior of the peninsula. Um If we go to
uh to the south, we have a long tradition
of state formation in Yemen because Yemen has better
agricultural resources, although the mountains are not very favorable
to states. Uh, AND in late antiquity, there's a
Himurite kingdom there, the Himurites being an Arabian people
somewhat distinct from the Arabs. But, uh, that state
comes to an end in the 6th century. And
by the time of Muhammad, when Muhammed is active.
There is no state in Yemen. Um, DEEP in
the interior, yeah, we have um memories of a
state known as the Kingdom of Kinda. Um, IT
seems to have been a rather sort of flimsy
state, uh, that lasted just a few generations and
had very serious ups and downs, uh, and not
a solid state based on a good agricultural basis.
There wasn't one. But I mean, whatever the importance
of that state at the time, it had disappeared
before Mohammed appeared. Mhm.
And what was the relationship between the Arabs and
the two empires, the Byzantine Empire and the Persian
Empire?
Right I think from the point of view of
the empires, there are two essential things about the
Arabs. One is that if you leave them alone,
what they will do is to raid your agricultural
territory. And this will disrupt agriculture. There'll be killing
and flight of, of peasants, and it's eroding your
agricultural base, so you don't want it. So you
want to find a way to stop the Arabs
raiding your territory. And it's difficult because um the
obvious thing to do when the Arabs raid is
to send troops to confront them, but by the
time the troops arrived, the Arabs are back in
the desert. Uh, TRACKING them down in the desert
is pretty awful. Um, SO it's not an easy
problem to solve that raiding problem. The other thing
is that, um, you know, since you're, you keep
fighting wars with the other empire. You can use
the Arabs as soldiers. You can pay them to
fight for you. And the way in which those
two problems are solved together to an extent by
the empires in late antiquity is by what I
mentioned before, client states. You have an Arab state.
That is subsidized and has good relations with one
of the empires. In the case of um the
Byzantine Empire is the Hassanids. In the case of
the Persian Empire is the Lahmids. And those states
will do two things for you. If it works
out. One is to keep order among the tribes
and the subsidies to give them help to give
them clout with the neighboring tribes. And the other
thing is to recruit from the tribes for your
army when you're fighting a war with the other
empire. So that's basically how it looks from the
point of view of the empires, from the point
of view of the Arabs, they're well aware that
um these empires out there are much bigger and
much more powerful than any Arab tribe can hope
to be. And there's a point at which this
is anticipating the Prophet Muhammad mounts an expedition that
is said to be directed against the Byzantines, and
there are a lot of Arabs. In Medina, who
are very skeptical of this expedition, and they say,
no, there's a big difference between Arabs fighting Arabs
and Arabs fighting the Byzantines. They're really militarily serious
people. Our Arab fighting among ourselves is just kind
of playing around. So there's a sense that those
empires are big and powerful out there.
So let me ask you now, in terms of
religion, what characterized the Arabs? Uh WERE there in
Arabia more generally, more broadly, not just the Arabian
interior. Were there any monotheistic religions back then?
Right, and certainly there were. Um, LET'S start by
just saying that um the baseline in Arabia is
paganism, polytheism. OK. And you know, we have Arab
gods that are attested in antiquity, and we're still
known at the time of the rise of Islam.
But of course, and of course back in antiquity,
you know, when the Roman Empire was pagan, being
pagan was the norm. In late antiquity, that's no
longer the case. Um, AND just as there's a
sense among the Arabs that um those empires are
much bigger and more powerful than us, there's a
sense that um maybe their idea of right religion
is a better idea than what, what we traditionally
have. There is some sense of that. And that
correlates partly with A monotheist presence in Arabia, a
presence of Jews. We have Jewish communities sort of
down Western Arabia as far as the Yemen and
in Yemen that Himirite kingdom. Well, some people say
it converts to Judaism. Some people say it develops
a monotheism on the model of Judaism, and I
don't have a position on that. But then certainly
there's very strong Jewish monotheist influence in late antique
Yemen and further north as well. Um, BUT I'm
predominantly on the edges of Arabia, what you have
is Christianity. And the Arabs are obviously aware of
that. Um Now, I think something crucial about Arabia.
Because it's, it's out, it's beyond the reach of
the empires. The empires in late antiquity impose a
kind of religious discipline within their territories, and the
Byzantine Empire wants you to be a Christian. It
would like everybody to be Christian on the same
page. The Persian Empire would like you to be
Zoroastrian. And there there is an intermittent persecution of
Christians. But Arabia is sort of completely open free
territory. Um, IS territory in which, I mean, as
one Meccan puts it in the time of the
prophet, um, why shouldn't a man choose a religion
for himself? Why should any state be telling me
what religion I should follow? It's up to me.
Uh, AND in that, um, within that kind of
religiously free territory, you get the development of People
and the Arabic term is Hanif, they're Haneef. And
what it seems to mean is that they're kind
of genetic monotheists, but they're not actually enrolled in
any existing monotheist religion. They're not Jews, they're not
Christians. There's some kind of intimation here of a
third way. And it probably isn't particularly important in
terms of Arabia before Islam. But I think it's
very important for the emergence of Islam. This idea
that there could be a third way that's neither
Judaism nor Christianity has some kind of presence in
Arabia.
And so perhaps picking up on that last point
you made there, how did these societies in Arabia
move from paganism to what would become a new
monotheistic religion, namely Islam?
Right. Now, first here, let me just slip something
in that there is at present a very interesting
controversy. About how far on the eve of the
rise of Islam, Arabia was still solidly pagan or
largely pagan. And how far paganism was a thing
of the past that some kind of monotheist sentiment
was much more predominant and I, you know, the
evidence is very contradictory and I don't have a
position on this, but um there is that question,
we should just note that. Now, in terms of
um how conversion takes place in Arabia. Um, I
mean, unfortunately, we don't have videos of, of it
happening. But put it this way, um. I think
one crucial thing is the worldly success of the
state that Muhammed established. That is to say that
it has a strong grip on Medina by the,
by the time of the death of the prophet,
a strong grip on Medina itself, and a fairly
good grip on the hijabs, and the region around
it, and some kind of presence that's hard to
evaluate over the rest of Arabia. So that um
among the Arab tribes of Arabia, there's a sense
that um You know, these Muslims are doing well
for themselves, they must be getting something right. Maybe
we should think about it. And the reaction you
get. Well, one reaction is you get lesser imitators
of Muhammad. People who set up as prophets, and
they don't succeed because the Muslims are able to
repress them. Um, BUT it shows you that sense
that, hey, monotheism, you know, does something for you.
Um The other thing that's going on is just
um individuals here and there converting or tribes here
and there converting. A common pattern is you have
a tribe with an internal feud. One group then
picks Islam, they become Muslims, and they can then
hope for help from the Muslim state. And the
other group digs its feet in and doesn't want
to convert. And in terms of um sort of
snapshots of conversion, and there's one story about um
two pagans who are transporting their idol on their
camel. And bad luck, the idol falls off the
camel and hits the ground and breaks into two
pieces. And then these two Arabs say, Well, if
this idol couldn't help itself from falling off the
camel and breaking into two pieces, is it really
much good? And they become Muslims. Uh, THERE'S another
story about him. A tribe that decides to convert
or a clan that decides to convert. And then
they have to, they're supposed to do the Muslim
prayer, and they haven't much idea how to do
it. But there's a kid who, um, he would
talk to traveling Muslims that were passing through the
traveling, the tribe's territory, and he'd learned a bit
of Quran. So they made this kid their prayer
leader, but uh the, the kid was came from
a very poor family. Uh, HE'S wearing a shirt
that's too short. The result is when he prostrates
himself in prayer, his bottom appears to the tribesmen
behind him, and the woman shouts out, aren't you
going to do something about the kid's bottom? And
they then get him a new shirt, which he's
very happy about. Now, no doubt there are lots
of things like that that are happening all over
the place, and we don't really get to see
it. But uh what we can say for sure
is that Arab paganism disappears very rapidly in the
early Islamic period.
So let's talk a little bit about Muhammad. Who
who was Mohammed really?
Right. Well, everybody agrees that he was a merchant.
And I think that's probably important because uh merchants
and they get to see different parts of the
world, different societies. Uh, AND you know, religious entrepreneurship
can go quite well with uh mercantile entrepreneurship. Then
the Islamic sources tell us exactly locate him exactly
within the tribe of Quraish, the tribe that dominates
Mecca. Um, AND it's Mecca where his mission begins
among this, this tribe of Qosh.
So, and why was it that he did not
simply adopt one of the other monotheistic religions present
in Arabia back in the early 7th century? I
mean, why was it that he created a new
religion?
Right. And I quite honestly don't know the answer,
but I think I could mention maybe a couple
of things that at least help to make it
possible or more likely. Um Right, and one would
be the previous existence of this kind of sense
of a third way. The Haneefs in Arabia. So
that it's not a kind of foregone conclusion that
either you're a pagan. Or you're a Jew or
a Christian. Um, THERE is some some daylight in
between those. That's one thing. The other thing is
that since I mean, if you look at a
conversion story like the, the French. In France or
the English. Um, WHAT happens there, the crucial figure
is A king And the king kind of listens
to what the missionaries have to say and decides
that this could be a good idea. And then
rather carefully, he engineers the conversion of his people.
Now, in stateless Arabia, we don't have kings like
that who will engineer the conversion of their people.
And that I think makes it all the harder
to uh carry out mass conversion. And in that
context, I think it may be important that Muhammad
has something to offer on the doctrinal level. That
is, his message is. You Arabs You're terrible pagans,
but you should know that you descend from Abraham.
Through his son Ishmael. Now, Abraham, everybody knows, was
a monotheist. And obviously he brought up his sons
to be monotheists. And so originally the ancestor of
the Arabs and for some generations no doubt his
descendants, they must have been monotheists. So this paganism
is something intrusive. It's not your real religion. Your
real religion is monotheism that you inherited from your
ancestor Abraham. So I'm not telling you to adopt
some foreign religion from out there. I'm telling you
to go back to your very own religion. This
Islam is your religion from Abraham. So there's something
there that in terms of appeal to the Arabs,
I think has a definite value.
So you mentioned Abraham there. What was the link
or how important was the link between the monotheistic
message of Muhammed and Moses and Jesus?
Right, I think they're also very important in that
um if you're going to adopt monotheism, they're very
clearly the key figures in the story, they're founding
figures. And I think I mean the process by
which Mohammad comes to see himself. As kind of
3rd in that line, Moses, Jesus, Mohammad. Um That
is, so to speak, what marks. The emergence of
Islam as a new and different religion. From what
went before.
So now a question that relates to something we've
already talked about, namely how scarce were the resources
in Arabia back then and how hard, how hard
it was to form a state. So how was
it that Mohammed was able to found a monotheistic
polity in such a region?
Yeah, it's a very good question. Um And I
think there are Uh maybe two parts to the
answer. Uh, WHAT is that um You know, if
we go by the tradition and I don't see
a reason to doubt it, um, he didn't start
with the ambition of founding a state. Uh, THE
foundation of the state was an incidental byproduct of
the fact that he had to find and his
followers were being persecuted. He needed to find security
for them. Um So there's something very chancy about
the establishment of that state. Why is it all
possible? Well, the person who thought most deeply about
this, I think was even Khaldoun. Back in the
in the Middle Ages, and what Ihadoon said, and
I don't have anything better to say really than
what Ihadoon said. He said that um Arab tribesmen.
I mean they are very refractory people. They don't
want to be told what to do, they don't
want to be pushed around. Uh, IT'S very hard
to be a king in Arabia. Uh, YOU know,
the, the Arab tribesmen don't accept it. So they
have this prickly pride. But if somebody comes and
claims authority, not as a king but as a
prophet. This enables him to do an end run
around this prickly pride of the Arab tribesmen. Uh,
THEY will submit to that in a way in
which they will not submit to kingly authority. And
it seems to be the case, and I don't
know exactly why it's the case, but it does
seem to be the case. And what makes it
seem to be the case is not just, you
know, the story of Muhammed, but the fact that
later in Islamic history, you have people, they religious
leaders who go to tribes. And managed to mobilize
tribes who previously had no kings or anything like
that. Somehow this religious religious authority works with the
Arab tribes.
So let me ask you about the Quran now.
How was it written and when was it written?
Right. Well, of course, if we take the Muslim
answer to that question, it's always been written. Uh,
IT'S up in heaven on a tablet inscribed on
a tablet. So I mean, the Quran is very
much a scripture, seen as a scripture from the
start. Um And I think we can now, in
the light of discoveries made in the last few
decades, we can say pretty definitely that from the
mid, the middle of the 7th century, the Quran
is written here on Earth too, and it's in
the form of a codex. It's a book. And
what is hard to figure out is exactly what's
happening in between, because in the sources give you
contradictory. Uh, INCOMPATIBLE indications, um. On the one hand,
they talk about Mohammed having scribes, who would write
down the revelations more or less as they came
down, so that um The oral, the, the, the
revelation is oral only from the moment it comes
from Gabriel to Mohammad to when Muhammad uh enunciates
it to his scribes. Uh, BUT on the other
hand, we have accounts of them, when the Quran
is collected into a single volume, that there are
certain verses that you can only get the text
of if you go to so and so, he's
the one who remembers it. Uh, OR in, there's
a battle soon after the death of the prophet,
uh, in fact, against one of the, those sort
of imitate rival prophets in Arabia, and many Muslims
are killed in that battle, though they win it.
Um, AND that includes many Muslims who knew the
Quran by heart. So back in Medina, there's a
kind of a moment of panic that if these
people get killed, we won't remember the Qoran anymore.
So we better write it down. So we have
these contradictory indications, and you have to piece together
whatever you think is the most plausible story.
So this is perhaps a good point to introduce
this question. In Islam, how does religion relate to
the state?
Right. Um. Yeah, first of all, um, I mean,
let's think away any kind of modern secularism. That's
not how pre-modern states worked. I, I think you
can say that across the board, just about any
pre-modern state is hand in glove with religion in
some way or other. And what I would do
here is distinguish two ways. Um One Well, there's
a saying that the Muslims inherited from the pre-Islamic
Persians that says that religion and state are twins.
So in other words, they're very closely connected, but
they're two separate things. And I think that's the
normal situation in the pre-modern world, that religion and
state are distinguishable, but closely related. So then you
take the Byzantine Empire, we have an emperor. That's
the state, and we have a patriarch, that's religion.
Two figures, not one. I think what's different about
Islam is that Well, first of all, originally, back
in the time of the Prophet Muhammad, we have
only one figure. Muhammad is so to speak, both
emperor and patriarch. In his role as prophet, he
exercises both political and religious authority. So there's a
complete fusion. They're not twins. They're the same thing.
Um And this is perpetuated in this after the
Muhammad's death in the sense that his successors. And
they're called caliphs. Now that's the Arabic Khalifa. And
the Khalifa is somebody who stands in for you.
And it can be, you can, you can be
alive and he's your representative, or you can be
dead and he's your successor. And the caliphs are
conceived as Khalifas in both those ways. In in
one telling, they're the successors of the prophet and
the other telling they're the deputies of God. But
either way, this is an office that fuses religious
authority with political authority, not as much religious authority
as in the time of the prophet, obviously, but
still real religious authority. And to the extent that
that system has Continued in Islamic history, there'll be
a lot of qualifications there. But it, it represents
the kind of ideal at the heart of the
religion. So that it never entirely goes away. It's
still there to be revived in the 20th century,
the 21st century.
So I have just a few more questions now
focusing on the state that Mohammed founded. So what
characterized this state?
Right. I think first what we've just been talking
about this unique authority of Muhammad as prophet. And
secondly, the other thing would be The absence of
any. Serious institutional structure that you might look for
in a state. And states usually have A standing
army. You know, they may recruit lots more soldiers
when they have a war to fight, but there
is a permanent army with a permanent commander who
may be replaced from time to time, but it's
an ongoing office. There's nothing like that in Muhammad's
state. And let's say that Muhammad wants to mount
a military expedition to go and confront a certain
tribe out in the desert. What you will do
is you'll get men together. Um, THEY'RE the expedition.
He'll appoint one of them commander. They'll go, they
accomplish their mission, they'll come back. And they're, so
to speak, demobilized. They go back into the society,
and the men are no longer, so to speak,
soldiers, so to speak, and the commander is no
longer a commander. So it's very ad hoc. Uh,
LIKEWISE, you know, you have a state, you want
to know about the bureaucracy. Well, there isn't anything
like a formal bureaucracy here. Muhammed has these people
who can write, so if he has a revelation,
they can write it down. If he wants to
write a letter to somebody, they can write it
for him, but there's nothing like a formal bureaucracy.
Um And then finally, Yeah, there's no formal institutions
of consultation and deliberation. There isn't an assembly. Or
a council like you have, say, in an ancient
Greek democracy. Now if Muhammad wants advice and from
time to time, he wants advice, you will get
people together and ask them for advice, but there's
no formal institution. It's very unlike, it's unlike, for
example, if we zoom out to 12th century North
African history, we have this figure even too marked.
And he again is a religious figure who is
recruiting the tribes by virtue of religious authority. But
I mean he has a council of 10, a
formal council of 10 with 10 known members. Nothing
like that in Mohammed's case.
And how much was Mohammed able to expand his
state during his lifetime? How did the Muslim world
look like after his death?
Right. And I think one could say roughly. That
There's a core area, the hijabs around Medina. And
in that area, he can give orders. There's then
a much wider periphery. This is more or less
the rest of Arabia, where he certainly has considerable
influence. Um, BUT it's hard to pin down just
how strong that influence is. And I, I think
11 certainly would have to say that um You
know, I mean, this is a completely unprecedented situation
in Arabia and it's probably very inherently unstable. You
know that um. The prospect of it surviving Muhammad's
death is not very high. A priori. Actually, we
know it did, but um that's another question.
So, uh, just before we go, let me ask
you one last question, because in our, in the
second part of this conversation, which we will record
later, uh, we're going to start by talking about
the caliphate from the 7th to the 9th to
the 9th century. What is the caliphate?
Right. So we have this Arabic term, Khalifa. It's,
it's definitely attested in pre-Islamic Arabia. And You know,
there's a ruler of the Yemen who appointed a
deputy, um, and we have the, you know, the
inscription recording this has the same root as the
word Khalifa. It's definitely an idea that's around. Um,
IN, in Muhammad's time, let's say Muhammad. He wants
to send an expedition, but this time he wants
to lead it himself. So what happens in Medina
while he's away, Mohammed appoints a deputy in Medina,
and that's Khalifa again. So then when Muhammad dies,
the question is what happens next and what happens
is the, that the community appoints a Khalifa, and
that is the caliph Abu Bakr.
Right. So, Doctor Cook, uh, the book is again
a history of the Muslim world from its origins
to the dawn of modernity. As I said, we're
going to record the second talk to cover the
rest of the book, the rest of the questions
I prepared. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you and it's my pleasure and look forward
to the 2nd installment.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
mere Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Curriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick Punteran
Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary Galman
Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus Slelisky,
Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous,
Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Heringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff McMahon,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.